---
layout: post
title: "Narrate: Innovation in Storytelling"
author: "George Richmond, Principal Engineer"
date: 2015-07-22 13:36:00
categories: javascript, react
image: /images/london-bombing.jpg
---


This July, Sky News delivered a [superb interactive narrative](http://narrate.news.sky.com/london7-7) of the terror attacks on London on July 7, 2005. The end product was very different to anything that we had delivered before, and was built using innovative new technology and ways of working in a very short time.

We wanted to create something that would deliver a compelling and easy to navigate overview of the story but let the extraordinary video content speak for itself. We also wanted what we built to go on to tell future stories and so we developed ‘Narrate’ - a reusable, fast, beautifully designed and mobile-optimised storytelling framework.

Close collaboration between editors, producers developers and the product owner was critical to creating the best possible experience in the shortest time. We co-located where possible and held regular stand-up meetings to discuss progress and outstanding issues. We set up a dedicated channel in our Slack team, enabling us to instantly share and discuss ideas and designs from our smartphones or workstations, wherever we were located.

Our designers were able to create realistic interactive prototypes from visual designs in minutes using [InVision](http://www.invisionapp.com), enabling everyone to interact with the prototype right from our smartphones, exactly as our users would. We also tested these interactive prototypes on users with [UserTesting.com](http://www.usertesting.com), recording the user interactions and verbal commentary as a video, providing valuable feedback for our designers.

Our editors needed somewhere to start writing their content and to link the videos to events on the timeline. [Firebase](https://www.firebase.com) was a great fit, allowing them to link videos to timeline events and interviews using a simple interface and see the results instantly. Future versions will be able to make use of Firebase’s live updating feature, enabling editors to instantly see their content across multiple devices. Our audience will receive content updates in real time without reloading the page, an ideal future platform for live coverage of news and sports events.

While our editors were busy writing, our developers got stuck into building the Narrate web experience. We chose [React](https://facebook.github.io/react/), an open source framework that is incredibly effective for representing data in a web application and managing the complexity of state changes as the user navigates through, without requiring a page reload. React’s simplicity meant that it took only a few hours for our developers who had no experience with it at all to become proficient and rapidly start producing features with minimal defects. The tiny size of the framework meant reduced download times and a fast experience for our users. React’s component-centric architecture allowed reuse of components from our first React project and simple extraction of components of future work.

For the body copy, we created a simple CMS in a few hours using React and [ReactFire](https://github.com/firebase/reactfire), which effortlessly integrated the editor tool with Firebase, allowing every keypress to be stored instantly and making the ‘save’ button obsolete. [Material UI](http://material-ui.com/) (React components implementing Google's Material Design) allowed us to put together a clean and elegant interface for our editors with minimal coding.

We needed somewhere to quickly upload our videos and photos, serving them instantly to our audience in the right format for their device. [Cloudinary](http://cloudinary.com/) handled all of this and even gave us automated tips on how to optimise the content for faster delivery. Narrate automatically detects screen size and requests appropriately sized content, automatically generated by Cloudinary’s transcoding engine.

[Divshot’s](https://divshot.com/) beautifully designed web and simple command line interface made it an obvious choice for hosting the HTML, CSS and Javascript of our site. We had a staging and production environment setup in minutes and pushed an early demo straight up to the public internet just by typing ‘divshot push’ and in seconds it was live. Divshot’s built-in blazing fast content delivery network ensured that the site loaded quickly and reliably for our users.

Later, we ensured that every change committed to the codebase was integrated and deployed automatically to our staging site within minutes, with regular deployments to our production site on demand. This meant no nasty surprises at the end and allowed our stakeholders to see the latest updates as they were committed. Rather than manage our builds in-house, we used [Circle CI](https://circleci.com/), who provide continuous integration as a service with minimal configuration. 

Sky is a huge technology company and has delivered many major and strategic projects over the years, building our own platforms and frameworks running on our own datacentre infrastructure. However it simply isn’t possible for us to stick to building everything ourselves while rapidly innovating, delivering and keeping ‘lean’. The R&D team has the flexibility to spend a limited budget on buying in new technology services as required and outsourcing the hosting, data storage and integration to third parties, enabled the team to focus on delivering a unique and outstanding experience in time.

It was a real privilege to work on such an important project that pushed the boundaries of digital storytelling from a technical and editorial point of view and we are very grateful to the interviewees for sharing their extraordinary stories with us and our audience.

The Narrate interactive timeline framework is a great opportunity for collaboration across Sky. [Take a look at the code](https://github.com/sky-plc/narrate-web) on our new GitHub organisation and we'd be delighted if you want to contribute. 




